---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Sample Essay: SE Ethical Evaluation
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2020-08-31
labels:
  - Software Engineering
  - Ethics
---

George Babbage is developing a software for a jet fighter. It is revealed that during testing the software is causing crashes. A patch is pushed to resolve the situations in test cases that cause the plane to crash but George is convinced this will not completely remove the possibility of the planes crashing. George believes a larger solution must be implemented involving of a redesign of the software in order to remove the design flaw causing the fighters to crash. 

George’s company is pressuring him to give the go ahead as a redesign will be costly and timely. It is implied that if George does not give in to moving on with the current design, he will be fired. 

The ethical dilemma remains in the fact that moving forward with the patch will save the company money at the risk of the jets crashing due to the software. George must decide between retaining his job or moving forward with a decision he considers unethical. Regarding the ACM software engineering code of ethics, some apply more than others and will be discussed one by one: 

Public: This section is not necessarily related as the problem is not discussing how the jet fighters are being used and is hard to connect to public interest. Although, crashing planes is likely bad for infrastructure and possibly dangerous to others, especially the pilots (if there are any). 

Client and Employer: This is a big one. George may comply with the company in moving forward with the patch, however the client more than likely did not request fighter jet technology with risks of the jets crashing. This would be a violation of what the clients requested or expected. 

Product: Another big one. The product is not being held to the highest professional standard as George sees a glaring issue and it has not been handled by the company. By moving forward with the patch, George would be violating this ethical code. 

Judgement: George would have to forgo his integrity and independence in his professional judgement in moving forward with the patch which is a blatant disregard for this ethical code. 

Management: The software engineering managers clearly do not have an ethical approach to the software’s development as they have prioritized their profit margins over the integrity and quality of their software. They are not following many of these ethical codes which makes this code violated. 

Profession: George is not advancing the integrity and reputation of the profession as if the product ends up failing and crashing, that will mean a step back in what is expected from software. Another code violated. 

Colleagues: George’s colleagues have not been mentioned in the statement other than those higher than him 

Self: George is not violating this specific code as he understands the software well enough to identify that there is a design flaw and what consequences it might lead to. However, the problem likely does not identify enough information to give him the pass or fail on this code. 

If George wants to uphold the ethical codes, he should not move forward with the patch even if it is at the expense of his position. 

